---
title: Curiosity
date: 2025-05-28
---

**Swarovski Curio 7x21**

It can be quite annoying to be on the receiving end of someone very needy. It can also be disappointing to realize you were the needy one in a close relationship, because knowing you helplessly annoyed someone is just disempowering. It's almost amusing how easy it is to tell when someone is interacting with you largely for the sake of fulfilling their own needs and not out of genuine interest for you. And yet it's much harder to notice or stop yourself when you're the one doing it. What exactly is neediness? Neediness is a strong attachment to specific outcomes in relationships. Neediness in and of itself is not a problem. People depend on relationships and specific things from relationships to survive and live fulfilling lives. But when does it become excessive? When you aren't aware enough of how you are truly impacting the other. When you are too self absorbed and attached to how the relationship might fulfill your own needs, you have no capacity left to think about what the relationship really stands for. The relationship festers into narcissism because when you cannot see the other, you do not comprehend that the other is giving you something, and therefore cannot genuinely receive anything. And you certainly cannot give back. Their gifts are no longer gifts but tithes needed to keep the relationship going.

What is the solution? I feel it lies in cultivating interpersonal curiosity. Obviously, if you have a genuine interest in discovering the other, you will try to see the other for who they are and work towards cultivating a relationship of reciprocity. But curiosity is interesting because it simultaneously is innate and cannot to be forced. So how can you cultivate it? The only real answer is practicing courage and honesty. Courage to seek and attempt to provide what the other needs from you, and honesty to understand deeply not only what you need from the other, but what the other can truthfully provide you. Curiosity is the desire to seek truthful understanding, which requires these two characteristics as prerequisites. Seeking a truthful understanding of the other is not only borne of love, but is what makes true love possible.
