---
title: Determinism and Valentine's Day
date: 2025-02-16
---

**Determinism**

Ever since reading Sam Harris' _**Free Will**_ many years ago for a high school english class, I've understood the world to be deterministic. Purely from a cause-and-effect standpoint, I feel Newton explained it best: an object in motion will stay in motion unless acted upon, and every action will incur an equal and opposite reaction. There is no reason for these statements to not hold in our lives as well. Each of our decisions and actions are a direct result of our current and past actions, internal states, and external influences. We make decisions based on past experiences that inform us of potential reward or harm in outcomes. But we are not in control of the subconscious gut reactions these rewards or punishments evoke in us that push us to decide a certain way. Nor can we choose our genetics and environmental states that helped shape how these reactions might manifest. 


My question is: are we really the ones making the decisions if we are simply observing and placating our subconscious reactions to whatever comes our way? We are at the mercy of our environment to provide choices that appear and feel viable to us, and the ultimate decisions we make are single actions in an infinitely long chain of equal and opposite reactions that reflect our genetics, past experiences, and upbringing. For any decisions we have made, how would it be possible to have chosen differently without knowing something we didn't at the time?


It's important to stress that determinism doesn't absolve us of personal responsibility. Any future decision and experience we face is still a consequence of what we have experienced and chosen to do in the past. While we may not be in direct control of our reactions and what we have experienced, I believe having a conscious preference towards taking actions that measurably improve your life can serve as a beneficial influence on our subconscious tendencies. Something we are destined to do does not actually happen if we take no action towards destiny. Perhaps this is why people who are better able to delay gratification are inherently more likely to be successful over time. They are able to focus on and react more positively towards long-term outcomes with fewer immediate benefits over shorter-term dopamine hits. Again, while this is considerably shaped by the genetics, upbringing, and current environmental + internal state of any individual, I think anyone with at least a budding tendency towards better long-term outcomes has the ability to at least try to bring about change in their circumstances to avoid a continued path of stagnation or decline.


**Valentine's Day**

As with most people in their 20s, I am experiencing that building meaningful personal relationships is one of the most important things someone can do to improve their quality of life. But I've always found it pretty challenging outside of a few years of my childhood. Unless there is a specific goal to accomplish with people, like going through a project or program together, I don't think I feel any legitimate or strong enough reason to actually connect. People have cited that the disappearance of third-places in modern society is leading to an increase in loneliness, and it's obviously true. But maybe it's a reflection of people (just me?) feeling that trying new things and going out to places just for the sake of meeting people cheapens the experience because you aren't actually able to focus on what you're trying to do. Does anyone actually like networking events? Why start a hobby you haven't cared about up to this point in your life for the sake of meeting people who are tied to the very hobby you don't care very much about? This is probably a reflection of my own choice of hobbies, like gardening and nature observation, which are fairly solo in where they lie on the social spectrum and thus safe from external interference. Regarding maintaining relationships, keeping up with old friends by constantly letting them know you are lonely and unenthusiastic about meeting people doesn't seem very fun. So it's not something I do. Looking at my situation more holistically, I'm not sure if I lack social skills or also lack a fundamental understanding of what personal relationships are for.


Now, I mentioned Valentine's Day because the question of finding a partner is almost constantly on my mind, and yet it's something I never really act on. I'm not sure if I know how to in a way that feels both satisfying and acceptable to my terms. I have yet to download any dating apps because the prospect of having to live with the fact that you weren't good enough to find a partner without one, and then having to either tell your future children this or come up with some fairy tale otherwise, seems incredibly embarrassing. The published dating app statistics the red pill community loves to cite certainly don't help, and someone I would truly be interested in probably won't be on a dating app anyways. Given this, I'm not sure what to do. I have very few close friends or contacts, and don't enjoy the idea of being set up. I don't enjoy going out to social events that are excessively public and loud or comprise mostly of people I don't know well. I currently don't feel volunteering or public service is worth my time, and so won't feel engaged doing so. Conversely, the list of what I enjoy doing to meet others feels pretty nonexistent. Then comes the question of value. What can I personally provide a partner? So far, it's very easy for me to conclude that I don't really provide anything apparent enough to have given me experiences better than what I am experiencing now. The chances that I provide zero value to a potential partner is probably non-zero, but certainly no one I have wanted to try doing so for has let me try or was available. The emotions behind this are probably responsible for a lot of subconscious resentment and self-rejection. Am I supposed to feel overstimulated and repulsed by the possibility of having to interact with someone I might feel interested in?


So what does determinism have to do with this? It's pretty clear that I feel both paralyzed and desperate regarding my personal circumstances, and I can blame my experiences, upbringing, and past actions (which are a reflection of the first two factors, and also an influence on them) for this. I should bring upon change, but how? Do I even want to change in the ways that help others in similar situations as me? I would have done so already if it were the case. I do know that I at least need experiences that might help shift my viewpoints and outlook. So I hope to remind myself if nothing else, that I should continue to try new things to expose myself to new experiences with others, even if my current views will likely prevent me from enjoying doing so. Knowing myself, I will probably be in the same place next year. It does kind of feel pointless to write this. But maybe I won't be. 

