---
title: Cognitive Rigidity
date: 2025-02-28
---

**Ignorance**

Cognitive rigidity is probably at the root of most of your issues. I can certainly feel it contribute to mine. Being flexible allows you to break patterns that lead to failure or stagnation, and obviously, no one logically believes doing the same thing over and over again will lead to different outcomes. How can one be more cognitively flexible though, if they aren't already? The subconscious mind does a very good job using past experiences to influence very heavily how you will act in the present. Understanding this is a given, but acting on it to consciously choose the unfamiliar is a completely different story. A lot of cognitive rigidity is driven by fear instilled by past experiences and ignorance of alternative, possibly better outcomes resulting from a lack of having those kinds of experiences. In a way, cognitive rigidity is cowardice if the person affected by it is aware of their own limiting thought patterns and is unable to change. What separates cowardice from bravery? Having a conviction that the thing you have a conviction for is more important than self-preservation. Convictions don't come out of the blue though. And a lot of cowardly thought patterns actively guard against non self-preservation, including considering the possibility that trying something new might actually be a good thing. 


It's a little unrealistic to force yourself to be open minded if you don't know how. But maybe having the belief that something new out there might help you be more so can be a decent starting point.


**Update 2025-03-31** 

Labeling willful ignorance as cowardice is one thing, but ignorance is often unintentional. One can be aware of what they lack, but not know how to effectively address and/or seek help for it. One may feel shame for even having to address what they lack in the first place. People are conditioned to focus and care only about outcomes, and not the process of attaining them. Any such process is bound to contain setbacks, but you must go through them to get any outcome you need or desire. In the grand scheme of things, everyone is always going through a process, and regardless of any experiences you might have that predispose you to hesitation, self-judgement, or shame, the most important thing to keep in mind is to accept, acknowledge, and celebrate your own progress. Only then will you be empowered to seek solutions in a positive, curiosity-driven way rather than out of shame or fear of judgement, or even not at all.
