---
title: Vega-Lite
date: 2025-04-01
---

**Truly Universal**

Recently, my lab professor briefly brought up Vega-Lite as a plotting library for one of our web services. We were already using Chart.js for the app and so I didn't really think much of it since the new metrics we were plotting were pretty simple, but then I looked into it again for a part-time data visualization job I am currently working on. Coming from someone who has worked with the limitations of using Plotly through R Shiny or Plumber APIs to distribute fairly complex interactive visualizations, it's truly groundbreaking. Instead of relying on code to specify exact drawing commands and supply the data, all you need is a JSON-object specification that contains the data and visual instructions needed for a plot. Then, any language that can call the Vega-Lite compiler can just take your JSON specification and spit out a fully interactive visualization that is consistent across any coding language or platform you render it from. In practice, this means several things:


- No need to manipulate code for plots on the frontend; since everything needed for the plot is contained in the specification, you don't need to run a single line of code specifying plot types, colors, axes, and interactivity. Just run the specification and display the result.
- No need to send pre-rendered figures or inline HTML with interactive plots from the backend; just the specification as a JSON object is fine.
- No need to pre-render or store figures in a data bucket in the first place; just store the JSON specification in a database and drastically reduce server-side compute and storage costs.
- No need to learn different APIs for plotting libraries across different programming languages; in data science and visualization, you currently have to choose between Plotly, Seaborn, ggplot2, Matplotlib, plotnine, and more. They each have their own coding syntax you need to spend some time learning to plot the same type of plot. And because they are built from code, the generated figures are not very platform-agnostic unless you save a static image or HTML rendition. With Vega-Lite, as long as you understand the specification grammar and know how to generate a JSON object in the language of your choice, your figure can be rendered by the Vega-Lite compiler, the same way as it would in any other language.


At this point, I'm not sure why Plotly still exists.
